language guide/1-hello-world.md, before:

#  Hello, World!

The journey to Swift begins.

### Table of Content
- [1. Hello, world!](#1-hello-world)  
- [2. Commenting](#2-commenting)  

## 1. Hello, world!

Printing in Swift is easy as it can be done with just one line of code, which is `print()`. You don't have to include the semi-colon `;` at the end of each line of code, but you can do that if your want to.

The syntax below will print the phrase "Hello, world!" to the console on separate lines.

```swift
print("Hello, world!")
print("Hello, world!");
```

You can also print other things, like a number or a result of a mathematic calculation, out to the console. The example below will print 2 and 12, respectively, to the console.

```swift
print(2)
print(10+2)
```

## 2. Commenting

Code is read by other people more frequently than you think. Therefore, we use comments so that other programmers can understand what we write. Since a comment is only visible to humans and gets ignored by computers, you don't have to worry that comment will destroy your code. In fact, you're encouraged to write comments.

There are 2 types of comments in Swift: single-line and multi-line. Single-line comments are often used to explain the logic of a code, and multi-line comments are used to explain a whole set of code.

- For single-line comments, use `//` to comment out all the texts that appeared behind it on that line. For example:

```swift
// This is a comment
print("some texts") // This is another comment
```

- For multi-line comments, you have to indicate the beginning (marked with `/*`) and the ending (marked with `*/`) of the comment. For example:

```swift
/* This is another comment,
but it spreads over many lines
*/
```

While single-line comments are most used for code explanation, multi-line comments are used for code documentation.

## References
Inc., A. (2022). *Language Guide*. The Swift Programming Language (Swift 5.6). Retrieved March 25, 2022, from https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide

Commit message:

Add Function and Demo code instructions

language guide/1-hello-world.md, after:

#  Hello, World!

The journey to Swift begins.

### Table of Content
- [1. Hello, world!](#1-hello-world)  
- [2. Commenting](#2-commenting)  

## 1. Hello, world!

Printing in Swift is easy as it can be done with just one line of code, which is `print()`. You don't have to include the semi-colon `;` at the end of each line of code, but you can do that if your want to.

The syntax below will print the phrase "Hello, world!" to the console on separate lines.

```swift
print("Hello, world!")
print("Hello, world!");
```

You can also print other things, like a number or a result of a mathematic calculation, out to the console. The example below will print 2 and 12, respectively, to the console.

```swift
print(2)
print(10+2)
```

## 2. Commenting

Code is read by other people more frequently than you think. Therefore, we use comments so that other programmers can understand what we write. Since a comment is only visible to humans and gets ignored by computers, you don't have to worry that comment will destroy your code. In fact, you're encouraged to write comments.

There are 2 types of comments in Swift: single-line and multi-line. Single-line comments are often used to explain the logic of a code, and multi-line comments are used to explain a whole set of code.

- For single-line comments, use `//` to comment out all the texts that appeared behind it on that line. For example:

```swift
// This is a comment
print("some texts") // This is another comment
```

- For multi-line comments, you have to indicate the beginning (marked with `/*`) and the ending (marked with `*/`) of the comment. For example:

```swift
/* This is another comment,
but it spreads over many lines
*/
```

While single-line comments are most used for code explanation, multi-line comments are used for code documentation.

## Demo Code
Above example codes are avaialable in the folder *Code* under the name [1-hello-world.playground](../../../code/1-hello-world.playground). For instruction to preview code directly on Github, please refer to this section on [Code Preview](../../../README.md/#code-preview).

## References
Inc., A. (2022). *Language Guide*. The Swift Programming Language (Swift 5.6). Retrieved March 25, 2022, from https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/LanguageGuide
